RFC 124: Use Edge Side Include (ESI) to deploy banners on GOV.UK (#124)
alphagov/govuk-rfcs: rfc-124-deploying-banners.md

# Use Edge Side Include (ESI) to deploy banners on GOV.UK

## Summary

Using Edge Side Include (ESI) to deploy banners on GOV.UK will help us move away from `static`/`slimmer` while being able to roll out changes quickly.

## Background

> A few types of site-wide banners can be activated to convey important information on GOV.UK.

Reviewer: Do we need to mention the survey banner here too? It's not something we tend to toggle on/off in the same way, but I assume we probably need to consider it here too.

Author: It's probably somehow similar to the cookie banner, in a sense that we anticipate updates instead of toggling, but it's a good point – I missed it. I'll try and look into it and include it as well.

Author: Correct me if I'm wrong, @vanitabarrett, but as far as I can see the survey banner is even more different than the other ones in terms of where the markup sits – [being exclusively generated by JavaScript](https://github.com/alphagov/static/blob/master/app/assets/javascripts/surveys.js#L15-L21).

Reviewer: @alex-ju That's true, I hadn't realised it worked in that way. But I assume it will still need a central place to live if we're retiring Static?

Author: @vanitabarrett yes. I had a more in-depth look and, with minimal changes, it could be componentised 'as is', then potentially brought more in-line with the other banners and components in general through a few iterations. Since that's outside of the scope for this RFC I only added a commit to cover it in the background section. Thank you again for reminding me about it.

## Proposal

Use Edge Side Include (ESI) to deploy banners on GOV.UK.

Edge Side Include (ESI) is a [web standard](https://www.w3.org/TR/esi-lang) originally proposed by Akamai and Oracle, among other companies. It allows an Edge Server (like [Fastly’s caches](https://www.fastly.com/blog/using-esi-part-1-simple-edge-side-include)) to "mix and match" content from multiple URLs.

In practice, the emergency banner on GOV.UK, for example, will require the following changes:

1. make the emergency banner available as a fragment (e.g. on `/emergency-banner`); this should be hosted on a frontend server, potentially served by a new application called `banners`, similarly with the other public-facing application
1. add an ESI include tag (pointing to the fragment) in the application layout
```
  <esi:include src="/emergency-banner" />
```
1. add an ESI remove tag and ESI comment to provide a fallback on environments where ESI is not available
```
  <esi:remove>
    <%= render "/components/emergency_banner" %>
  </esi:remove>
  <!--esi
  <esi:include src="/emergency-banner" />

>   -->

Reviewer 2: Might be worth marking this up as a `diff` so it's clearer you're modifying the code you added in the previous step. It took me a little while to figure out you didn't want to have `<esi:include` appearing twice in the document.

```diff
+  <esi:remove>
+    <%= render "/components/emergency_banner" %>
+  </esi:remove>
+  <!--esi
  <esi:include src="/emergency-banner" />
+  -->
```

```
1. enable ESI in Fastly via Varnish Configuration Language (VCL)

> 1. optional: add extra logic in VCL. Fastly gives us the ability to create custom responses at the edge – called "synthetics" in Varnish terminology – which can be used to include personalised, dynamic information that will be served from the edge instead of origin

Reviewer 2: Are you hinting that this could be used to, for example, configure which pages the banner should not display on (instead of using JS for that)?

Author: yes, it can be configuring which pages the banner should not display on, it could be the number of times it's being shown.

### Pros

> - performance gains (a higher cache-hit ratio, quicker page loads, less traffic spikes)

Reviewer 2: Is the "less traffic spikes"/"higher cache-hit ratio" because the banner can be cachebusted in isolation, as per point 3 in this list? And is the "quicker page loads" because of the reduced JS?

If so, I think it's worth splitting these out into separate points ("improved server-side performance", "improved client-side performance")

Author: Updated this point and split it up as suggested. For the client-side, I'm referring to the fact that the cached page assets can still be used by the browser when the banner is enabled/disabled as they won't be re-fingerprinted.

> - the include fragment will have its own URL and thus independent VCL logic and caching TTLs

Reviewer 2: This isn't a 'pro' in and of itself - could it be merged with the next line?

Author: Agree, they should be merged

- due to the above, fragments can be purged independently of the main HTML content – this allows banners to roll-out instantly without having to drop the cache of all public-facing applications in GOV.UK
- ESI remove can be used to store fallback HTML content (which could be the rendered banner component) and therefore make local development easier and more consistent with production

### Cons
- origin must serve top-level page HTML as an uncompressed response (or support content-encoding negotiation) in order for Varnish to be able to do streaming ESI replacement
- it is also not possible for Varnish to compress the response after ESI processing. Fortunately Fastly has a workaround for this which forces H2O (Fastly’s HTTP terminator and HTTP/2-3 server) to do the streaming compression (which supports both `gzip` and `brotli`). This can easily be enabled via a HTTP response header which is subsequently stripped by H2O. However, as Fastly bills from bytes out of Varnish this would result in you getting billed for the uncompressed bytes instead of the compressed version. We are on a flat fee plan and thus this should not be an issue

> - if ESI is not implemented correctly can make us vulnerable to different attacks (SSRF and XSS)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- if ESI is not implemented correctly, it could make us vulnerable to different attacks (SSRF and XSS)
```

Could you elaborate on this?

Author: _If_ an attacker manages to add an ESI include tag to the HTTP response, through publishing platforms or (reflected) XSS, they can perform SSRF attacks in the context of a surrogate server. Of course, we have cyber to test these things, but it's worth bearing in mind so we close as many doors as possible from the start.
